195 | 0.5968368053436279 | Munro HN, ed. Mammalian Protein Metabolism, vol. IV. Academic Press, New York, 1970.
Waterlow JC, Garlick PJ, Millward DJ. Protein Turnover in Mammalian Tissues and in the Whole Body. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1978.
Wolfe RR. Radioactive and Stable Isotope Tracers in Biomedicine: Principles and Practice of Kinetic Analysis. Wiley-Liss, New York, 1992.
Young VR, Yu Y-M, Fukagawa NK. Energy and Protein Turnover. In: Kinney JM, Tucker HN, eds. Energy and Protein Turnover in Energy Metabolism: Tissue Determinants and Cellular Corollaries. Raven Press, New York, 1992: 439–466. 

156 | 0.5777585678624683 | The protein requirement of adults is usually considered to be the continuing dietary intake that is just sufficient to achieve a “maintenance” of body nitrogen, often measured only over relatively short experimental periods. For infants and growing children and pregnant women an additional requirement is needed for protein deposition in tissues. However, this concept is oversimplified since the chemical composition of the body is in a dynamic state and changes occur in the nitrogen content of individual tissues and organs in response to factors such as diet, hormonal balance, activity patterns, and disease. Thus, proteins are being continually synthesized and degraded in an overall process referred to as turnover. The rate of turnover and the balance of synthesis and degradation of proteins, in addition to the mass of protein, are also important determinants of the requirements for nitrogen and amino acids, and these aspects will be discussed in the following section.
Turnover of proteins and amino acid metabolism Protein synthesis, degradation, and turnover The principal metabolic systems responsible for the maintenance of body protein and amino acid homeostasis are shown in Figure 4.5. They are.
● protein synthesis ● protein breakdown or degradation ● amino acid interconversions, transformation, and eventually oxidation, with elimination of carbon dioxide and urea production ● amino acid synthesis, in the case of the nutritionally dispensable or conditionally indispensable amino acids. 

160 | 0.577111457414119 | organ protein maintenance since there is no net tissue growth under most circumstances. Second, as will be seen later, at all ages in healthy subjects the rates of whole body protein synthesis and breakdown are considerably greater than usual intakes (the latter are about 1–1.5 g protein/kg per day in adults) or those levels of dietary protein thought to be just necessary to meet the body’s needs for nitrogen and amino acids (about 0.8 g protein/kg per day). It follows, therefore, that there is an extensive reutilization within the body of the amino acids liberated during the course of protein breakdown. If this were not the case it might be predicted that we would be obligate carnivores and this, undoubtedly, would have changed the course of human evolution. Third, although not evident from this discussion alone, there is a general as well as functional relationship between the basal energy metabolism or resting metabolic rate and the rate of whole body protein turnover. Protein synthesis and protein degradation are energy-requiring processes, as will be described elsewhere in these volumes, and from various studies, including interspecies components, it can be estimated that about 15–20 kJ (4– 5 kcal) of basal energy expenditure is expended in association with the formation of each gram of new protein synthesis and turnover. In other words, protein and amino acid metabolism may be responsible for about 20% of total basal energy metabolism. Because basal metabolic rate accounts for a significant proportion of total daily energy expenditure, it should be clear from this discussion that there are significant, quantitative interrelationships between energy and protein metabolism and their nutritional requirements. For these reasons it would not be difficult to appreciate that both the level of dietary protein and the level of dietary energy can influence the balance between rates of protein synthesis and protein breakdown and so affect body nitrogen balance. Their 

132 | 0.5515198707580566 | 4.1 Introduction Protein is the most abundant nitrogen-containing compound in the diet and in the body. It is one of the five classes of complex biomolecules present in cells and tissues, the others being DNA, RNA, polysaccharides, and lipids. The polymerization of L-α-amino acids through synthesis of peptide bonds contributes to the formation and structural framework of proteins. These may contain two or more polypeptide chains forming multimeric proteins, with the individual chains being termed subunits. Proteins are the workhorses in cells and organs and their building blocks are the amino acids, which are joined together 

192 | 0.5465264320373535 | 4.9 Perspectives on the future The purpose of this chapter was to provide a general overview of human protein and amino acid metabolism and a basis for an improved appreciation of the metabolic determinants of the requirements for protein (nitrogen) and for specific amino acids. With the recent beginning of the postgenome era, functional genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics will take on an increasingly important basic and applied research focus in biology. Thus, it will be even more critical for students to understand the physiology of human protein metabolism at its various levels of biological complexity (cell, organ, and whole body) and its nutritional corollaries.
There are certain areas of research in protein nutrition where more knowledge will equip nutritionists to make the best use of available food supplies. An example is the influence of the ratio of total essential or indispensable amino acids to total nitrogen and amino acid requirements for different physiological states. Another is the need for a functional definition of protein requirements (e.g., indices) for maximum resistance to disease and enhanced physical performance. These are some of the challenges facing nutritionists in the future. It is hoped that this chapter will serve as an appropriate catalyst for further learning in this area of human nutrition. 

